---
layout: post
title:  "Welcome to my Blog!"
date:   2017-11-10 22:24:12 -0200
categories: jekyll github-pages
---

This is my first post here. My intention is to publish some tutorials, notes and even personal thoughts. 

Since it's my first post and I did not finish the blog page yet, I guess would be appropriated if I start to talk about how I made this page. This is just some notes not a tutorial about Jekyll. Well, it's still better of that "Welcome to Jekyll" autogenerated post.

First of all, I have absolute no time (or energy) to spend creating a fully complex web blog. Back on the days, I try Blogspot and Wordpress and I simply **hate** those. They're 'bloated' with weird stuffs and we have to write everything in html, search for JavaScript plugins to make something simple as pretty print code. Even worst I have to write everything on their own interface.

I'm very rust on web development to create something from scratch and host it somewhere. I have not write any web code since 2010. So, that's not an option. Then, I find that Github have a pretty neat solution - **Github Pages + Jekyll**.
 
Github pages offer you a way to create a repo on your Github account and then create a project page or a personal page (blog) using Jekyll.

## What is Jekyll?

[Jekyll][jekyll_page] is a simple static web page generator writem in Ruby. Jekyll is advertised as a blogging platform but, can be used others static websites. It uses [markdown][markdown_site] which is a nice way to create HTML pages[^1]. Also you can host it on [Github][github_pages] and easily deploy your site for free, making easy to create project pages or user page/blog using a github account.

## How I made my blog?

First of all let me explain the difference bettween a **project page** and **user page**. They are nearly identical, but there are a few important differences between them. A user page are always build from master. So you need to create a repository with the format *username.github.io* and then you can access your page via *http://username.github.io*. While a project page have the format *username.github.io/projectname* or *orgname.github.io/projectname* and can be build from *master*, *gh-pages* and, */docs* folder on master. 

It's important to know the difference bettween project pages and user pages to avoid mess up things. A while ago I created a small test creating a project page and called it blog, it was just a test, and I forgot about that repository. Recently, I start to create this blog (user page) and whatever I try to access my blog I was getting the (old) test version. Why? Because it on the same domain and if you have a project page called blog already published at the same URL, and the project page will take precedence. You can read more about it Github page types [here][github_pages_help]

After that I've started with some Jekyll templates offered by the Github settings, one click and done. But, I do not like it. They are all weird. First of all it's only created a *_config.yml* with a *jekyll-theme:* entry. I wan't something simple, I want to start simple, but have a little control of what's going on. So I started to crawl some tutorials on the internet and I find a nice one [here][tutorial_jekyll]. I follow the tutorial but I have somethings to point out.

### Installing Jekyll on you local machine

It's important to build and test your page localy since, Github will only trigger the build process when you push changes to master branch. You can do that and check the build results on the repo Settings. The only problem is that you may end up with lots of "dirty" commits on the master tree unless you *rebase* and *force-push*.
 
I use Ubuntu 16.04 LTS and Fedora 26, the author uses MacOS and XCode (yucc!). So, if you uses a Debian or Redhat based distro you can follow my notes here to install Jekyll.

Install the dependencies:

```console
sudo apt-get install ruby ruby-dev zlib1g-dev libffi-dev libxml2-dev libyaml-dev -y
```

For Fedora the process is pretty much the same except that you must to install *redhat-rpm-config* package otherwise you will get an error when try install jekyll gem:

```console                                                                                
 /usr/local/lib64/gems/ruby/ffi-1.9.18/mkmf.log                                 
                                                                                
extconf failed, exit code 1                                                     
gcc: error: /usr/lib/rpm/redhat/redhat-hardened-cc1: No such file or directory" 
```

Why I have to install *ruby-dev* package too? Because if you don't you will get a *"Failed to get header"* error when you try to run Jekyll serve. You also have to install *zlib1g-dev* or you get a configure error:


```console
Gem::Installer::ExtensionBuildError: ERROR: Failed to build gem native extension.
...
zlib is missing; necessary for building libxml2
*** extconf.rb failed ***
```

Now you can install Bundle and Jekyll:

```console
sudo gem install bundle jekyll
```

Then on the project root folder you must run:

```console
bundle install
``` 

This will install all bundle dependencies. That's it, to create your github pages.

### Create a dev configuration file

To test your changes on the page locally it's good idea create a *_config_dev.yml* (always keep production and develop environments separated). Them, on the *_config.yml* (production) you will have to fill the *baseurl* and *url* field with the relative path initial page, in my case "/" (index page) and the url with your *http://username.github.io* (or your custom domain) before commit it to *master*. On *_config_dev.yml* (development) I fill those fields with *""*.

Run Jekyll server:

```console
bundle exec jekyll serve --config _config_dev.yml

```
It will run the Jekyll server at *localhost:4000* with your dev configurations. Now you can just check your changes before submit to Github.

## Conclusion

Jekyll is a nice static web page generator. With only few minutes I was able to create my personal page and upload that on Gihub. I still have to customize somethings (if I ever have time for that) but I'm happy with the result. For now, I will focus on the content and have my notes transcribed here.

* * *

### Notes:

[^1]: Jekyll allows to select other markdown type. By default it uses [kramdown][https://kramdown.gettalong.org/quickref.html]. I am stick with the default for now.


[markdown_site]: https://github.com/adam-p/markdown-here/wiki/Markdown-Cheatsheet
[jekyll_page]: https://jekyllrb.com/
[github_pages]: https://pages.github.com/
[github_pages_help]: https://help.github.com/articles/user-organization-and-project-pages/
[tutorial_jekyll]: https://www.taniarascia.com/make-a-static-website-with-jekyll/
